<appendix id="installation">
<title>Installation</title>
<para>
The following sections contain detailed instructions for obtaining, compiling, and installing &kst;
along with any optional libraries or packages.  If you use a package management system, you may use
it to install &kst; instead.
</para>


<sect1 id="installation-obtaining">
<title>Obtaining &kst;</title>
<para>
&kst; is part of the extragear/graphics module of &kde;.  You can also download the latest version
separately from the &kst; <ulink url="http://kst.kde.org/">website</ulink>.
</para>

<para>
The current version of &kst; is also available via SVN. It can be downloaded anonymously with the following command:
</para>

<screen><userinput>svn co svn://anonsvn.kde.org/home/kde/trunk/extragear/graphics</userinput></screen>

<para>
You can also browse the &kst; source code using the KDE WebSVN repository at <ulink url="http://websvn.kde.org/trunk/extragear/graphics/kst/">http://websvn.kde.org/trunk/extragear/graphics/kst/</ulink>.
</para>

<para>
More information about accessing KDE SVN repositories can be found at <ulink url="http://developer.kde.org/documentation/tutorials/subversion/">http://developer.kde.org/documentation/tutorials/subversion/</ulink>.
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="installation-fromsource">
<title>Installing &kst; from Source</title>
<para>
The following sections detail how to compile and install &kst; from source code.
</para>

<sect2 id="installation-fromsource-requirements">
<title>Requirements</title>
<para>
&kst; v1.6.0 requires the &kde; 3.4 libraries and &Qt; 3.3.  Almost all major &Linux; distributions have packages
for &kde; and &Qt;.  Since &Qt; is a dependency of &kde;, having the required version of &kde; should
be sufficient.  It is recommended that you refer to your particular distribution's documentation for
&kde; library installation.    Note that the entire &kde; desktop environment
is not required&mdash;in most cases, look for packages called <filename>kdebase-*</filename> and
<filename>kdelibs-*</filename>.  Alternatively, more information is available on the &kde;
<ulink url="http://www.kde.org/download/">website</ulink>.
</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="installation-fromsource-optional">
<title>Optional Libraries and Packages</title>
<para>The following libraries and packages are optional, but provide full plugin and data source functionality in &kst; if installed. Installation/Download instructions for the packages are given on the linked websites.</para>
<note>
<para>
You may already have some or all of these libraries and packages installed, in which case there is no
need to reinstall them.  Also, check first to see if pre-compiled binaries for the libraries and packages
exist in your distribution's package management system, as it may be easier to install these packages.
</para>
</note>

<informaltable>
<tgroup cols="2">
<thead>
<row>
<entry>Library</entry>
<entry>Description</entry>
</row>
</thead>
<tbody>
<row>
<entry><ulink url="http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/">GSL</ulink></entry>
<entry>The &GNU; Scientific Library (GSL) provides a variety of mathematical operations for the built-in
&kst; plugins. Having GSL installed enables a variety of plugins such as linear and non-linear fitting,
 correlation, and interpolation.</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><ulink url="http://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/fitsio/fitsio.html">CFITSIO</ulink></entry>
<entry>CFITSIO provides support for reading and writing to the FITS (Flexible Image Transport System) data format. This is required by all of the datasources which use FITS (currently <link linkend="data-sources-healpix">HEALPix</link>, <link linkend="data-sources-lfiio">LFIIO</link>, and <link linkend="data-sources-wmap">WMAP</link>)</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><ulink url="http://cdf.gsfc.nasa.gov/">CDF</ulink></entry>
<entry>The Common Data Format (CDF) library is required to read files with the <link linkend="data-sources-cdf">CDF datasource</link></entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><ulink url="http://cdf.gsfc.nasa.gov/">netCDF</ulink></entry>
<entry>The network Common Data Form (netCDF) library is required to read files with the <link linkend="data-sources-netcdf">netCDF datasource</link></entry>
</row>
</tbody>
</tgroup>
</informaltable>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="installation-fromsource-compiling">
<title>Compiling and Installing</title>
<para>
Once all of the prerequisites have been met on your system you can compile and install &kst;.  It
is assumed that you have already downloaded the &kst; source package.  If not, please see
<link linkend="installation-obtaining">Obtaining &kst;</link>.
</para>

<para>
The simplest way to install &kst; is:
<screen><userinput><command>tar -zxvf kst-<replaceable>version</replaceable>.tar.gz</command>
<command>cd kst-<replaceable>version</replaceable></command>
<command>./configure --prefix=`kde-config --prefix`</command>
<command>make</command>
<command>make install</command></userinput></screen>
replacing <replaceable>version</replaceable> with the version of &kst; you have.
</para>
<important>
<para>Note that <command>kde-config --prefix</command> is surrounded by backquotes.  It is very
important that the <command>kde-config</command> utility returns the correct path (most likely
<filename>/usr</filename>), otherwise &kst; will <emphasis>not</emphasis> install properly.
You can double-check by running it directly:
<screen><userinput><command>kde-config --prefix</command></userinput></screen>
Ensure that a non-null path is displayed.
</para>
</important>

<para>
You can read through the messages displayed by the <command>configure</command> script&mdash;if it
reports any missing libraries (such as GSL) that should not be missing, please go back and ensure
that the libraries and header files have been correctly installed in the appropriate locations.
</para>
</sect2>

</sect1>
</appendix>


<!-- Keep this comment at the end of the file
Local variables:
mode: xml
sgml-omittag:nil
sgml-shorttag:nil
sgml-namecase-general:nil
sgml-general-insert-case:lower
sgml-minimize-attributes:nil
sgml-always-quote-attributes:t
sgml-indent-step:0
sgml-indent-data:true
sgml-parent-document:("index.docbook" "book" "appendix")
sgml-exposed-tags:nil
sgml-local-catalogs:nil
sgml-local-ecat-files:nil
End:
-->
