- 2003.05.11

This dir contains a copy of libexif 0.5.9, available from
http://libexif.sourceforge.net.

Libexif is used in Gwenview to read and write the EXIF Orientation tag from
JPEG files. It's necessary because right now KFileMetaInfo can only read this
tag. Gwenview performs lossless rotations using jpegtran, but it needs to reset
the orientation tag after rotation because its value is no longer valid.
Another missing feature of KFileMetaInfo is the ability to work on memory
instead of files: to reset the Orientation tag using KFileMetaInfo, Gwenview
would have to first write the JPEG data to a file, then modify the file (thus
loading it and saving it again).

The libexif public interface does not provide methods to write the EXIF
information back into the JPEG. 'exif', the command line binary provided with
libexif to manipulate tags relies on additional code to read and write from
jpeg files. I had to make a copy of this additional code (the jpeg*.[ch] files)
to be able to write EXIF data back into JPEG files. Since I was already
duplicating some code, I thought it would be better to completely duplicate the
library (it's quite small) to avoid adding another dependency to Gwenview. To
avoid including the system libexif include files, I renamed the dir from
'libexif' to 'libgvexif'.


- 2003.07.29

Just updated to libexif 0.5.10. this version fixes the bug which caused
Gwenview to stop displaying image when browsing a dir containing more than a
thousand JPEG files.


- 2003.12.14

Updated to libexif 0.5.12 and applied some fixes from libexif CVS.


- 2005.05.17

This copy of libexif is now deprecated, but will still be used if ./configure
doesn't find libexif installed. This will ease transition, but this directory
will eventually be removed.
